Metal.jl v1.4 blog post (#47)
JuliaGPU/juliagpu.org: post/2024-10-02-metal-1.4.md

+++
title = "Metal.jl 1.4: Metal.rand"
author = "Christian Guinard"
abstract = """

>   Metal.jl 1.4 adds higher-quality on-device random number generation from Metal Performance
>   Shaders. Some limitations apply, with fallback to the previously-existing rand
>   implementation in those situations."""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Metal.jl 1.4 adds higher-quality random number generators from the Metal Performance
  Shaders library. Some limitations apply, with a fallback to the current implementation
  in those situations."""
```

`on-device` might make people think of `rand()` in kernels.

+++
{{abstract}}

> ## Metal.rand and friends

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `Metal.rand` and friends
```

> Using functionality provided by the Metal Performance Shaders, improved on-gpu random number

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using functionality provided by the Metal Performance Shaders library, improved GPU random number
```

generation has been implemented. Uniform distributions using `Metal.rand` (and its in-place

> variant `Metal.rand!`) are available for all Metal-supported integer types and Float32.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
variant `Metal.rand!`) are available for all Metal-supported integer types and `Float32`.
```

However, due to Metal [API](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/metal/mtlblitcommandencoder/1400767-copyfrombuffer?language=objc)
limitations, 8-bit and 16-bit integers may fall back to the lower-quality GPUArrays.jl random

> numbers if their size in bytes is not a multiple of 4. Normally distributed Float32 values can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
number generator if their size in bytes is not a multiple of 4. Normally distributed `Float32` values can be
```

> generated for with `Metal.randn` and `Metal.randn!`. Float16 is not supported by the Metal
> Performance Shaders RNG, and will always fall back to the GPUArrays implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generated for with `Metal.randn` and `Metal.randn!`, while `Float16` is not supported by the Metal
Performance Shaders library and will always fall back to the GPUArrays implementation.
```

The easiest way to use these is to use the Metal convenience functions `Metal.rand[n][!]`
as you would the usual functions. However, the regular Random.jl methods can also be used
by providing the appropriate `RNG` either from `MPS.default_rng()` or `MPS.RNG()` to the

> standard `Random.rand[n][!]` functions.

Reviewer: Maybe add a small code snippet just to break the flow of text?

## Other improvements since the last blog post

- Since v0.5: `MtlArray` storage mode has been parameterized, allowing one to create a shared storage `MtlArray`
  by calling `MtlArray{eltype, ndims, Metal.SharedStorage}(...)`.
- Since v0.3: MPS-accelerated decompositions were added.
- Various performance improvements
- *Many* bug fixes.

## Future work

Although Metal.jl is now in v1, there is still work to be done to make it as fast and
feature-complete. In particular:

- since the last blog post, Metal.jl has started using native ObjectiveC FFI for wrapping
  Metal APIs. However, these wrappers have to be written manually for every piece of

>   Objective-C code. We are looking for help improving Clang.jl and ObjectiveC.jl to enable
>   the automatic generation of these wrappers. See tracking [issue](https://github.com/JuliaInterop/ObjectiveC.jl/issues/41);

Reviewer: I'd use inline links here and below instead of explicit "See tracking ...", a la:

```suggestion
  Objective-C code. We are looking for help improving Clang.jl and ObjectiveC.jl to [enable
  the automatic generation of these wrappers](https://github.com/JuliaInterop/ObjectiveC.jl/issues/41);
```

- the MPS wrappers are incomplete, automatic wrapper generation would greatly help with
  full MPS support;
- support for atomic operations is missing, which is required to implement a full-featured

>   KernelAbstractions.jl back-end. See tracking [issue](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/Metal.jl/issues/218);

Reviewer: Atomics _are_ supported, we just need to hook them up to Atomix.jl for KA.jl.

- full support for BFloat16 values, which has been supported since Metal 3.1 (macOS 14),
  is not yet in Metal.jl. See tracking [issue](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/Metal.jl/issues/298);
- some functionality present in CUDA.jl could be ported to Metal.jl to improve usability.
  See tracking [issue](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/Metal.jl/issues/443);
- general performance improvements. In particular, improvements to the ObjectiveC.jl type model
  could greatly reduce the number of allocations currently necessary for every

>   Objective-C/Metal operation. See tracking [issue](https://github.com/JuliaInterop/ObjectiveC.jl/issues/13).

Reviewer: I'm not sure this minor issue is worth mentioning. Small CPU allocations are really fast, so I'd be surprised it's a real issue (compared to other performance issues with Metal.jl stemming from missing GPU functionality).
